Xylem, Inc. (NYSE:XYL) Q4 2018 Earnings Conference Call January 31, 2019 9:00 AM ET
Patrick Decker
Thanks Matt and good morning everyone. We have a lot to cover, so I’m going to hit on a few highlights from our 2018 results, then I’ll turn it over to Mark to provide some additional details.
As I reflect on this past year, one of the things that stood out to me is the momentum that we built on the topline. We delivered our strongest growth to-date as a public company with 8% organic revenue growth. We saw healthy advances in each of our businesses, with a number of important achievements, including several successful new product launches and strategic project wins.
We also saw 9% organic orders growth this past year. Fourth quarter orders were up double digits and showed strength across all of our businesses. We see continued strength in our bidding pipelines across the entire company. We see strength across our transport and Applied Water businesses, and it’s worth noting that a growing portion of our orders and recent wins are for longer lead time projects in our treatment, Sensus and AIA businesses. This tells us that our markets appear to be very healthy over the near and long term, and it further strengthens our conviction around our 2019 and longer term growth prospects.
For Adjusted EBITDA, we saw an improvement of 80 basis points, which was in line with our guidance of 19.5% for the year. Operating margins were slightly short of our guidance for the year at 13.7%, up 60 basis points excluding purchase accounting year-over-year.
We saw benefits from productivity, volume leverage and price realization which accelerated throughout the year. Partially offsetting these gains were inflationary pressures, sales mix and funding our strategic investments. Much of that investment has been focused on our measurement and control solutions segment. This is aimed at capturing significant revenue opportunities across our businesses. The investment also capitalizes on our first mover advantage in providing new digital and analytics solutions. We expect this to moderate as we enter the second half of the year.
I’m very pleased with the benefits that we are already realizing from this strategy. Since the Sensus acquisition we won more than $100 million in contracts that will provide revenue synergies and we expect to announce another exciting and significant deal this quarter.
Adjusted earnings per share were up 20%. Our full year free cash flow conversion was below our expectations. We took measures in late Q4 to maintain customer service levels impacted by component shortages by building inventory of critical items and we made strategic purchases to manage tariff impacts. We remain confident in our ability to deliver free cash flow conversion at or above 100% in 2019 and beyond. So in summary, while there is certainly areas for us to work on, I am pleased with our strong momentum as we head into 2019.
Let me now spend a few minutes on the progress we are making our top strategic priorities that enable us to meet our long term financial commitments and maintain the company on a path of sustainable growth and margin expansion. The first is accelerating profitable growth, which encompasses our initiative to drive commercial excellence, grow in emerging markets and further strengthen innovation and technology.
First commercial excellence: I’m encouraged by market share gains across a number of our business lines. I also want to expand upon our team’s execution on price. We can attribute about one point of the organic growth we saw this past year to our commercial teams pricing efforts, and we see continuing strength throughout 2019. I am very proud of what our sales and marketing teams have demonstrated here in terms of commercial leadership. In emerging markets we delivered 11% revenue growth and orders momentum continued in our key focus markets of China, India and the Middle East.
Advancing innovation is another core element of our longer term growth strategy. Our team delivered 120 basis point increase and our vitality indexed over 25% and we are pleased by the accretive growth rates and margin profile of these new offerings.
We’re also excited about a number of new technologies that will bring the market in 2019. These offerings combine our data, analytics and software capabilities with our installed base and this is enabling us to bring in entirely new solutions to our customers and we aim to help them address their biggest challenges or water scarcity, affordability and resilience.
As I already mentioned, we remain sharply focused on our continuous improvement program. In 2018 we achieved $157 million in savings, a 6% increase in the previous year. We saw plenty of runway on our CI journey and see more efficiency opportunities as we penetrate deeper in the company and across our functions.
To that end, we are now planning the next stage of our business simplification efforts which we spoke about at our last Investor Day. This is the next progression in our plan, which we timed to avoid disrupting our focus on growth and the integration of new businesses over the last 18 months. This work will now further simplify our business structure, eliminate waste and bureaucracy and allow us to move faster and with greater agility to better serve our customers.
We will also focus on future manufacturing and supply chain efficiencies, from footprint optimization, SKU rationalization and improvements to our cost of quality. We expect the execution of the majority of these actions to begin in the second half of 2019.
We estimate up to 100 basis points of savings on a run rate basis, with most of the benefits in 2020 and the balance in 2021. This work reinforces our confidence in achieving our 2020 targets, and it positions us to be more efficient and focused for the long term.
We continue to put our capital to work in smart disciplined ways. This allows us to develop organically, as well as acquire the solutions we need to best address our customers’ challenges. These investments have focused on disruptive technologies and solutions and we will continue to remain steadfast in our approach in that area.
We continue to return capital to shareholders, today announcing a 14% increase in the dividend, consistent with our commitment to growing our dividend in line with earnings growth. We are very proud of our talent and we continue to strengthen our team to a number of investments and development programs, strategic hires and the talent that joins us through acquisitions.
And finally we are a purpose driven company. In 2018 we advanced our commitment to be a company that crates both significant economic and social value. We’ve achieved our original five year sustainability goals one year ahead of schedule, and we are set to release ambitious new goals this spring.
We’re honored to have been recognized by a number of external organizations for these efforts, yet we can and we will do more. In terms of the solutions we provide, our social impact in areas like disaster relief and our environmental footprint. Sustainability is increasingly important to our people, our customers, our investors and the community and it’s a key priority for Xylem.
So now let me turn it over Mark.
Patrick Decker
Thanks Mark. As we discussed, we ended the year with solid topline momentum and we are confident in our trajectory and focus on achieving our 2019 targets and long term strategic goals. For 2019 we expect to deliver organic revenue growth of 4% to 6%. Our adjusted operating margin is forecast to expand 100 to 150 basis points to the range of 14.7% to 15.2%.
Let me pause and acknowledge that we realize one of the keys to achieving our margin expansion in 2019 and staying on track to our 2020 targets is to now begin delivering accretive margin improvement in the MCS segment.
We expect to drive 100 basis points to margin expansion despite continued investment and component supply cost pressure in the first half of 2019. Now back to the outlook, we expect adjusted EBITDA to improve by 100 to 150 basis points, which will bring it to a range of 20.5% to 21%.
At the bottom line we expect to generate adjusted full year earnings per share in the range of $3.20 to $3.40. This excludes restructuring and realignment cost of about $30 million. Adjusted EPS growth is projected to be in the range of 11% to 18% for the year. Finally as Mark discussed, we expect to continue to generate solid cash from operations and this will enable us to deliver free cash flow conversion of at least 105% in 2019.
Please turn to slide 12. Now let’s review the expected end market growth for 2019. First Utilities, which make up about 50% of our revenue, are expected to grow in the mid-single digits. As we saw in 2018, we expect water and wastewater spending to remain healthy, particularly in the U.S. and emerging markets. This includes mid to high single digit growth in our Water Infrastructure business, as well as mid-single digit growth in the MCS business reflecting timing of project deployments.
In Europe the outlook is mixed and we expect low single digit growth there in total. We are encouraged by the continued infrastructure investments and locations like India, where wastewater regulations are leading our healthy treatment backlog. In both India and China, we expect to grow double digit.
Our industrial end market which represents roughly 35% of our revenue is expected to be up low to mid-single digits. Growth in the U.S. is expected to moderate slightly in the second half of the year compared to the last two years, however still up mid-single digits. We expect the emerging markets to continue to gain strength in India and Latin America.
Industrial Applications in the Middle East are expected to soften a bit and we expect China growth to moderate slightly to low to mid-single digits. Our commercial end market which constitutes about 10% of our revenue saw considerable growth in 2017 and 2018. We expect this to remain healthy in 2019. The U.S. and Western Europe will provide low to mid-single digit growth and overall we expect the commercial end market to grow low to mid-single digits in 2019.
And finally in our smallest end market, Residential, which is about 5% of our revenue, we anticipate low single digit growth. With a flattening U.S. housing market and a highly competitive replacement market, U.S. and European growth is expected at flat to low single digit levels. Emerging markets growth remains healthy as secondary clean water demand continues in China and Greater Asian.
Now Mark will give you a few additional details on the 2019 outlook.
Patrick Decker
Thanks Mark. 2018 was a year of solid momentum. We are very encouraged by the health of our end markets, as well as the growth in the organic and inorganic investments that we’ve made. We are also very pleased about the integration of our recent acquisitions, which are allowing us to provide new disrupted solutions.
We are managing through near term challenges and supply chain disruptions in the marketplace and we are confident in our near and longer term targets based on growth and accretive margins in large deals, as well as the additional opportunity we have to remove cost and inefficiency. We are guiding in 2019 to what we believe is healthy topline growth and margin expansion to execute on our 2020 financial targets.
Now with that operator, let’s open it up to Q&A.
Patrick Decker
Sure, so this is Patrick. So I’d say Nate, you know first things first. I mean we believe we have a highly credible 2019 plan that we’ve gotten to hear to get at least 100 basis points expansion this year. Beyond that, let me give you some of the large bucket that we see for 2020.
First which is the biggest bucket is our savings from continuous improvement and cost take out, and that’s all net of inflations. So that’s our biggest bucket. That’s again continued productivity on our procurement and lean journey. We also have savings that began to wrap late ‘19 into ‘20 from our global business services initiatives, as well as the broader simplification that I outlined in my prepared remarks.
The second area is again the core volume and price leverage that we expect to get. You know even at the low end of our long term revenue growth guide of 4% to 6%, we expect to see very good margin accretion and leverage flow though there. And then third, is the large deals that we’re getting right now from the Sensus synergies and AIA and those deployments start later this year and really layer on in full fold in 2020.
Additionally as we commented earlier, our investments in the MCS segment do begin to moderate later in ‘19 and then moderate once again in 2020 from our 2019 levels. So those are the four really big buckets that give us the confidence to be able to hit our marking guidance.
Patrick Decker
You know I would just add Nate, I would say – again this is Patrick. I would say much like Mark talked about in his prepared comments around working capital and cash conversion I would say the same thing around CapEx and that is there is no structural change here in the capital intensity of this business. It really is the timing around the things that Mark eluded to here and we would expect that to moderate back to kind of normal levels. So nothing that we are particularly concerned about here.
Patrick Decker
Sure Mike, this is Patrick. So we are saying you know we are keeping our areas close to the ground obviously on each one of our end marks, so let’s start with utilities. We really aren’t saying or hearing any indications of a slowdown. Again, if you think about the 10% increase in our bidding pipeline and treatment which is a really good indicator and that’s you know, that’s on a very big pipeline. So you know at some point in time you’ll expect that to kind of be tough in terms of year over year compares, but it continues to expand there, and that is consistent whether it be in North America and certainly in the emerging markets as we indicated.
We think Europe is next. You know it will moderate to kind of low single digit growth in 2019, but we’re not seeing any change in trajectory here, which is quite encouraging. Now we also feel that a fair amount of that is share gains, but again the overall market seem to be healthy.
On the industrial side, again you know 35% of our total revenue, you know there are channel partners; we go heavily through distribution. They again continue to see strength in the market. Again, we are calling for some moderation here in the second half of this year. We are not seeing that yet, but we are calling it. We are expecting that there will be some tough comps year-over-year that are out there. And so not sure if that’s helpful, but you know we’re not seeing it right now in terms of any slowdown.
A - Patrick Decker
Yeah, so we’ve been very encouraged. I think where I start Mike is we are able to have very different kinds of conversations today at different levels of the organization, more senior levels of the organization than we’ve had before, because if you think about any company going in and speaking to, let’s take utility, irrespective of what the utilities biggest challenges are, if you’ve only got one or two products to offer or a couple of pain point you are going to address, you spend your time trying to convince them those are the pain points they need to be addressing. We are able now to go in with confidence and first have a conversation around what are the biggest challenges that you believe you have or that the data shows that you have. With a pretty high likelihood we also then have the product, the technology, the offering to solve that problem and so we’re able to be seen as even more objective and consultative in the conversation.
Now that’s early days. You know we’re not – we don’t have that selling capability across the board. I don’t want to get ahead of ourselves, but that’s certainly where we’re going, and so I see a high degree of receptivity from the utility operators and CEO’s, because they want to be able to have that open candid objective conversation.
You know where we see a lot of the opportunities here, where we see a lot of synergies is new wins and interests across the emerging markets, where you know if they are building new infrastructure, they don’t want to build dominant infrastructure, they want to build smart infrastructure and so they need the help to be able to know how to best optimize that and that’s why we are seeing a lot of the receptivity there.
And then, you know when you think about the fact that previously Pure and the other advance infrastructure analytic businesses that we’ve acquired were pretty much largely North America and to some extent you know European businesses. Not a lot of presence in the emerging markets and that’s where we’re seeing a lot of the excitement from customers.
Patrick Decker
And I would also just add there that I think it’s important that we know that you know we’re managing a portfolio here and so we’re allocating capital you know every day, every quarter, each year. And so you know we continue to invest in water infrastructure, we continue to invest in applied water. Obviously as we begin to see the ramp up in MCS margins here, that affords us the opportunity to further invest in those two pieces of our portfolio, because there’s a lot in the pipeline from a new product development standpoint and sales and marketing efforts that we’d like to be able to do here, but you know we’ll continue to manage that as a portfolio over time.
Patrick Decker
Yeah, absolutely Deane. We definitely took it on the chin in the quarter relative to some of these strategic you know pre buys, as well as and whether that was for the tariffs or around the component shortages, and you know we also as I mentioned in my prepared remarks saw a big ramp up in volume and quite frankly it was higher than certainly the – we had forecasted, above the top end of the range and the timing of that in the quarter was such that there were you know – that was $90 million of cash just in terms of volume.
And that is going to normalize in both of those items, along with continued progress on improving our processes and efficiency, whether it’s in receivables we’ve got a lot of opportunity on the inventories side of things with supply chain in our S&OP and payables, but those will reverse out in 2019.
Patrick Decker
Yeah, and I think to your question Deane around, you know are there any specific projects to be called out in 2019, one of the reasons why you know we’re not able to say that it’s moderating or declining is because we also need to absorb and it’s not a big ticket item, but you know we’re going to be you know likely kicking off another greenfield expansion in India in terms of manufacturing capacity.
Now that won’t all hit in ‘19, but we’re certainly going to be starting that in ‘19. It’s not a big ticket item in and of itself, but it’s enough to kind of hold these numbers flat year-over-year and that’s just really again to get ahead of the incredible demand we’re seeing in India.
Patrick Decker
Yes, so the AIA platform is still a you know relatively small chunk of revenue for us at you know north of $100 million of revenue and that is going to be growing a very healthy double digit and is accelerating in 2019 versus ‘18, both orders and revenue. It really is the centerpiece of the platform and really Deane, it’s just very straight forward; its assumptions around timing on project deployments.
So you know we’ve got some very large deals that we’ve won. We have some that we are likely going to be announcing here in very short order. It just comes down to when those things hit. Most of them we believe will hit in 2020, which is what gives us great confidence around our margin expansion and growth in 2020. So obviously the timing of those things could move this around, but we are giving you our view kind of right down the middle of fairway right now.
Patrick Decker
Yeah, and I’d say – sorry, this is Patrick. Sorry for that. No, it’s a great angle on the question John. The way I would articulate it would be, yes there are things that have created – leveled the dilution on their own, that being deals and things of that nature from an on margin standpoint, and this is a journey over time you know. It doesn’t end in 2020 and obviously it won’t be long and we’ll be giving you targets beyond 2020.
What I would say has changed here are a couple of things that give us the confidence. One is that, we do see further opportunities to drive simplification and efficiency across the organization. Part of that obviously is by way of some of the integration synergies from the deals that we’ve done, part of that is just simplification of our heritage businesses by further integration there and simplification. So certainly we are leaning on that level harder than we had necessarily laid out at our original Investor Day, but it’s based on opportunity.
Two, as we’ve added other you know assets to the portfolio and we are getting more mature on our own continuous improvement, you know the whole lean deployment journey, we are now able to deploy those capabilities across those new assets and so you now we’ve got a bigger pie to play with here in terms of driving efficiency, both on the lean sig sigma side, but also on the procurement side.
So those are the area that I would say that we are feeling even more confident about. And then, you know what we indicated at Investor Day was that as we integrated Sensus, we would get a better feel over time as to what the investment profile would look like on a year-by-year basis and so that moderates now that we are getting traction and you know seeing the benefits of what we’ve already spent on.
A - Patrick Decker
Yeah, I would say you know it’s obviously hard to put a specific number on that, but I would say that directionally if I use the 80/20 rule here, yeah I’d say it’s still 80% is just you know brute force, get out there, leverage the fact that we got to drive price to cover inflation, cover the tariffs, you know those kinds of issues.
While at the same time certainly in each one of our businesses, at least the three segments, what I’ve been really encouraged by is the highly accretive margin profile of the new products that we’ve been bringing to market, whether they be products for different business models and that’s more of a big criteria and our new product development pipeline is, it’s got to be accretive in terms of growth rate, but also margin for the company. So I’d say that’s the kind of 20% if I picked a number to say that it’s been more value based pricing capability.
Patrick Decker
Yeah, so to you know kind of breakdown China a bit here. So again we are expecting double digit growth in 2019, which dose moderate slightly from the 23% growth that we had in ‘18, but it’s still going to be – we expect strong double digit growth.
Now as you as you probably recall, we actually – two-thirds of our revenue in China is in the utility space, and that’s historically been pretty well protected. So when you think back what two, three years ago when companies were going through the shock in China and the downturn, we in the aggregate were down slightly, but even within that our utility business never declined, you know it grew throughout that cycle. It slowed, but it grew. It was the industrial and commercial piece of the business, the other third that took the big hit like our other industrial peers.
So your thesis is absolute correct in that one, the long lead time nature of the treatment orders and pipeline is what gives us great confidence that you know we don’t see an overall slowdown impacting us in China in ‘19 certainly on the utility side of the business. Secondly, we’re seeing very good growth in transport, you know on the pumping, on the waste water pumping side, which is very good margin business. That is more near term, short cycle business that remains strong.
We are not prognosticating here, but we are building into our guide some slowdown in the industrial and commercial building piece of the market in the second half of the year, which is what really kind of helps moderate our growth from 2018. I shouldn’t say help, but leads to that along the way. But the other lever we got there is this new AIA platform. I mean we’ve got tremendous adoption across the Chinese customer base in terms of excitement in that area. Again, a small piece of business, but very promising for ‘19 and beyond.
Patrick Decker
No, we’re going after the operating peace. I mean we lay out the EBITDA just because there is noise in there and you know deal accounting and things of that nature, but no we are measured on operating income, that’s a third of our annual incentive plan. The other third is organic revenue growth and the other third is working capital. And so you know we’re – that’s the way we are playing it Joe.
Patrick Decker
Sure. Yeah, so China has now become our second largest market outside of the U.S., albeit still relatively small. So our revenue in China is roughly about $300 million and that was about $170 million just a few years ago, just to give you a feel. So again, still not large numbers in the absolute, but growing very nicely.
India is just under $100 million of revenue, with an order book that is well above that here in 2019, but India is still a relatively small piece of our overall revenue, but just again going to be our fastest growing market in ‘19 and ‘20.
Patrick Decker
Sure. Yes, so we’ve not seen – I guess first of all the kind of deals that we do, you know I’m very proud of our M&A team and our folks in the businesses as to how they cultivate these deal opportunities and relationships, which has proven over time to help keep the multiples either in a really attractive spot or in a manageable spot, and so we’ve not seen any big move or expansion in multiples.
By having said that, not for those reasons you also though haven’t seen us do a deal in the last 12 months, and so it’s kind of hard to say at this point in time, as to what there maybe is a gap between seller and buyer expectations. But we’re not seeing any big move there at this point in time.
In terms of the question around the three segments, first of all we like all three, they each have interesting opportunities, but they play different roles, and so I would say that if you look at our Water Infrastructure space and you look at our MCS space, that’s largely around the utility and I think there you will continue to see us do smaller bolt on tuck-ins to build out this new analytics platform, as well as strengthen the digital offerings of our product lines along the way, but they are not going to move the needle in terms of capital outlet, based on what we have line of sight to today.
But then when I turn to the Applied Water segment, and you think about our industrial water business there, we see potentially attractive opportunities in that space to further move that business up the technology curve and round out our solutions offering in that set. So there are opportunities across the board. Obviously we are prioritizing the digital and software component, but that’s not at the exclusion of also defending our core product offerings when the opportunity presents itself.
Patrick Decker
Yes Brian, I would just maybe wrap up that question with an additional view. Your question around maybe tracking below the previous year through the first nine months, that was really being driven by a couple of things.
So we were tracking very well from a working capital improvement year-over-year standpoint through the first nine months of the year, and so as a result of that, we were also confident in our ability to fund some of the CapEx that Mark alluded to around the dewatering fleet, the cap software in Sensus, smart hubs in AIA and then that’s what drove some of the year-over-year declines in the first nine months.
But we were expecting before we had these issues that Mark laid out around the supply chain constraints and just a big pop in receivables in December because of a heavy revenue month, we were expecting to be able to claw that back and be at or above 100% free cash flow conversion. , and that really was the surprise for us.
So, that’s on us, we own it. We are rectifying it and we’re highly confident we’re going to be at or above the 100% in ‘19 and well beyond. There is no structural change here.
Patrick Decker
Alright, well again, thank you everybody. Safe travels. I appreciate your continued interest and support. See you out on the road, and we’ll talk to you again after our Q1 earnings call. Thank you all.

